LaVerne Gray: Hello good.
Hannah Erickson: evening session i'm going to make to come home.
LaVerne Gray: Okay, should we be recording this part.
Hannah Erickson: it's already recording okay.
LaVerne Gray: Hello stephanie how are you.
Stephanie Lunn: Good how's it going.
LaVerne Gray: Good good surviving.
Stephanie Lunn: always good to hear.
LaVerne Gray: Yes, yes, with a smile on my face so it's all good.
Stephanie Lunn: So I just wanted to maybe get in a little early and see if I could just check my slides we recorded our audio so that since we were switching between two speakers to make it easier.
Stephanie Lunn: Okay, so I just.
Stephanie Lunn: I have all of that in one presentation, but I just want to make sure there's some construction of my building so i'm wearing headphones and I just want to make sure it plays okay.
Stephanie Lunn: Before everyone else joins if that's okay sure.
Stephanie Lunn: i'm gonna go ahead and share my screen.
Stephanie Lunn: And then, let me go ahead and start and then maybe you can just let me know if you could hear it.
LaVerne Gray: not yet.
Stephanie Lunn: Could you hear that.
LaVerne Gray: No, no, only you clicking, I think, maybe it might be the headphones that.
Stephanie Lunn: That is what I was afraid of.
Okay.
Stephanie Lunn: So let me go ahead and see if there's another way to.
Stephanie Lunn: change my.
Hannah Erickson: Share screen share.
Stephanie Lunn: Let me.
Stephanie Lunn: Stop my share.
Stephanie Lunn: You see.
Stephanie Lunn: It just tells me who are the sharing options, but I don't know that it's giving me share sound okay.
Stephanie Lunn: Thank you.
LaVerne Gray: Thank you so much.
Stephanie Lunn: appreciate it.
Stephanie Lunn: Okay i'm going to try, one more time.
Stephanie Lunn: If that's okay.
i'm stephanie one and today.
Stephanie Lunn: i'll be presenting exploration.
LaVerne Gray: very nice yes.
Stephanie Lunn: So on okay great Thank you so much, I was, like, I just wanted to make sure that was working rather than waiting till the last minute, and then we have other people on the line, and it doesn't work.
LaVerne Gray: OK, so the agenda for this session goes that I just want to verify that I will introduce the session and read your biographies of the presenters biographies that were on the.
LaVerne Gray: site and and then i'll turn the floor over to you to share your screen and also in that time to make sure I asked the attendees they are supposed to enter questions in the chat right Hannah or.
Stephanie Lunn: Would they prefer that we answer them in the chatter.
Hannah Erickson: See notes why.
LaVerne Gray: And if they place them there you know, in the end at the end of your recording I will go back to.
LaVerne Gray: You know, to address those questions you know, at the end of the recorded session and just want to make sure I pronounce your name correctly a stephanie Loren and Lila the heady.
LaVerne Gray: Is that okay.
LaVerne Gray: Yes, the heady okay all right.
Stephanie Lunn: yeah so I figure i'll stay muted, you know i'll play the presentation and like I said, we have audio for each slide and we have it time so that we still have some time at the end for questions as well.
Stephanie Lunn: And then obviously will come up live, so that we can answer any questions that they may have, and let us know to if you want us to also answer them in the text form we can do that as well.
LaVerne Gray: Sure i'm depending on the the repetitiveness and number.
LaVerne Gray: It would call for that.
LaVerne Gray: yeah yeah.
Stephanie Lunn: Okay, I may be timing, the slide because I have it, it doesn't automatically transition.
Stephanie Lunn: So as soon as I i'll try to type in between, but I don't want the sound of me typing to get in the way of the presentation, so, if nothing else, you can still have them, I will answer each one of them individually in the after the presentation as well.
LaVerne Gray: Okay okay yeah because we want to.
LaVerne Gray: Exchange go ahead Hannah sorry.
Hannah Erickson: It says there's a shared comment document for questions for attendees.
LaVerne Gray: Right I.
LaVerne Gray: ice i'm in.
Stephanie Lunn: I see the Q amp a in the chat of the session
LaVerne Gray: But there's a Google Doc.
Stephanie Lunn: is another one too.
LaVerne Gray: And I will.
LaVerne Gray: post that so you can have access to it now and then.
LaVerne Gray: If that's the one you're talking about Hannah.
Hannah Erickson: yeah I think so.
Okay perfect.
Stephanie Lunn: Excellent.
Okay.
LaVerne Gray: Oh fran is in this conference.
LaVerne Gray: Okay, so.
Stephanie Lunn: We need to remove some of the slides from that original link, would it be worthwhile for me to upload to that link in that folder that we shared for the session a newer link.
Stephanie Lunn: Do you think.
LaVerne Gray: A.
Stephanie Lunn: are willing not matter.
LaVerne Gray: I think it matters, but not at this moment, maybe to an end, I will make a note to my.
Stephanie Lunn: content and change much we just removed some things as we.
Stephanie Lunn: went through, and as we both recorded some you know we realized the timing.
Stephanie Lunn: was a little different.
Stephanie Lunn: So now we're like Okay, we have a little bit much, and we want to give you full.
Stephanie Lunn: time to ask questions to.
LaVerne Gray: Okay okay so yeah so.
LaVerne Gray: it's totally fine to have an updated link.
LaVerne Gray: yeah I don't want you to.
LaVerne Gray: bother yourself with it now, but you know when you.
Stephanie Lunn: Have the folder open, so I can go ahead and do it right now and then just delete the other one, I just wanted to give you the heads up.
Okay.
Stephanie Lunn: And then i'll right now, this is final, but then you know we can delete the other one once you switch the link over.
Stephanie Lunn: And it's uploading right now that will have our audio to you in case they want to listen to us.
Stephanie Lunn: That appeals.
Stephanie Lunn: OK, so the final one should be in the drive now, if you want to switch the link in that other document.
Stephanie Lunn: And then I can delete the other one, so it doesn't get confusing, you have a bunch of these in the final file.
LaVerne Gray: Okay okay.
Okay.
LaVerne Gray: Is.
Stephanie Lunn: perfect.
Stephanie Lunn: You want me to delete the other one.
LaVerne Gray: You can.
Stephanie Lunn: I just want to make it easier on you, so you don't have a bunch of files in their.
Stephanie Lunn: name it with the other ones, so it doesn't take time.
Stephanie Lunn: make a little cleaner.
Stephanie Lunn: Okay uploaded and renamed.
LaVerne Gray: Okay, and I have another question get like two minutes.
LaVerne Gray: So prefer the attendees to ask to comment on the the have questions and comments on the Google Doc.
LaVerne Gray: or in the chat or how does.
Hannah Erickson: It says in the instructions that they're supposed to ask it in Google Doc but I easier for them to just put it in the chat or maybe we can just tell them that the doctors for questions.
Hannah Erickson: Okay, whichever one you guys think is the easiest.
LaVerne Gray: And I will.
LaVerne Gray: probably say the chat because people will be joining at different times in then they may or may not be able to see the form.
LaVerne Gray: And that you know cause them to look away from the screen.
Hannah Erickson: I can, I can maybe copy and paste them as they're asking in the chat.
LaVerne Gray: Okay okay yeah definitely Thank you so much.
LaVerne Gray: Do you know how many are registered for this.
Hannah Erickson: have access to that.
LaVerne Gray: Okay.
LaVerne Gray: I don't know if I do either actually.
LaVerne Gray: But.
Stephanie Lunn: I see 35 according to Hoover.
LaVerne Gray: Okay okay great great.
LaVerne Gray: Now, is it up to me to know I can't let people in alright.
LaVerne Gray: So i'm good we're going to get started, if that's Okay, because we're scheduled at 115 and it's 116 and i'm sure folks will be joining us as we move along, I want to take this time to welcome everyone to this very important session.
LaVerne Gray: i'm excited about hearing from the speakers and the way that the press the session will go is that I will introduce the speakers.
LaVerne Gray: And the session, and we will then have questions, and you can place questions in the chat.
LaVerne Gray: As you think of them, and we will have and also after the recording is done, the presentation is done, you are welcome to.
LaVerne Gray: open your camera or not.
LaVerne Gray: But I just asked that everyone, please be patient with us as we're working through this medium, but we are looking for a great session and looking to learn a lot.
LaVerne Gray: The title of this session is exploration of intersection ality and computer science demographics understanding the historical context of shifts in participation.
LaVerne Gray: And our two presenters here are stephanie Lon who's a PhD candidate she just waved a PhD candidate.
LaVerne Gray: In the school of computing and information sciences at Florida international university working in the learn CS laboratory under the supervision of Dr monique Ross.
LaVerne Gray: Her research interests span the fields of computing education data science and machine learning.
LaVerne Gray: Previously stephanie received her bs and Ms degrees in neuroscience from the University of Miami in addition to bs and Ms degrees in computer science from Florida international university.
LaVerne Gray: Our second speaker is Layla the heady is she's a PhD candidate in the school of computing and information science at Florida international university.
LaVerne Gray: Her research interests include data science educational data mining machine learning and optimization and information retrieval.
LaVerne Gray: Her current research focuses on educational data mining and machine learning optimization methods.
LaVerne Gray: And i'm going to before I turn it over to them i'm going to introduce myself i've felt like I was in class and I just started speaking.
LaVerne Gray: My name is laverne Gray and i'm an assistant professor at Syracuse university at the school of information, studies and i'm happy to be here with everyone.
LaVerne Gray: Today, and then and again just please place your questions in the chat and we will address them after the presentation is done so i'm going to turn it over to stephanie and Layla.
Stephanie Lunn: Everyone.
Stephanie Lunn: Go ahead and share my screen.
i'm stephanie one.
LaVerne Gray: And today, along with Layla Haiti i'll be presenting exploration of intersection ality and computer science demographics understanding the historical context of ships and participation.
Computer and information technology occupations are projected to rise 11% between 2019 and 2029, which is a rate faster than the average for other fields, it is estimated that in the next decade 530 1200 new jobs will be added.
Events given the growing demands and computing we wanted to know how have white black Hispanic and latinx native American and Asian women's participation and computing shifted over time.
And what major historical events and activities describe the context of the notable shifts observed in women's participation.
intersection ality refers to a theoretical framework for exploring the overlapping components of an individual's identities.
Whether political such as their political affiliations, social, such as race, gender or disability organization organizational such as job title.
or circumstantial such as being a student or parent intersection ality is a call to scholars to not ignore undervalue the complexities associated with experience of those that stratified more than one axis of oppression, including race, gender class sexual orientation, etc.
This framework, points out that women are not a monolith and, as such, do not experience life or marginality the same.
Previously literature has described how women of color are shaped by existing within multiple spheres of minority categorization often facing both racism and sexism, and the importance of considering intersection of identity is more than just the sum of individual labels.
intersection ality presents the opportunity and the argument for dis aggregating data and evaluating.
In this case, black women Hispanic women native American women in Asian Women and their complex identities, rather than lose them and over generalize aggregated data.
And our study we leverage prior work to focus on social identity and deliberately apply an intersection a lens in selecting presenting and interpreting the data.
It is important to establish some of the general demographics, in the United States for context.
According to the last United States census bureau reports whites represent 76.3% of the total population and 60.1% when considering the white not Hispanic designation.
Likewise, black and African Americans are 13.4% American Indian and Alaska natives are 1.3% and Asians are 5.9% of the population, furthermore, 18.5% of the total population are Hispanic or Latino, meanwhile, women are actually 50.8% of the total demographics.
However, in computing these numbers may look a bit different according to the support Center for social impact, who I give credit to for this slide men are an 82% of bachelor's degrees in computer science well, women earn only 18% and only 20% or black or latinx.
Our goal was to consider undergraduate enrollment and graduation rates in computing fields and to examine trends between 1987 and.
Additionally, we consider the intersection ality of social identities when dis aggregating the data.
Since prior work has demonstrated the importance of considering those situated at the intersection of race or ethnicity and gender what investigating persistence.
In order to try to explain the start peaks and valleys and the quantitative evaluation we also apply historical context analysis.
when trying to gain a historical perspective of the enrollment or graduation rates in computing over time.
There are three primary sources of enrollment graduation statistics, the computing research Association, the National Science Foundation and the Association for computing machinery.
However, it should be noted that each considers different data sources and therefore presents different types of information.
The computing research association referred to a CRA conducts a survey annually institutions throughout the United States and Canada to describe changes and computing students enrollment.
graduation and employment dating back to 1984 they publish their findings in this era tell the survey annually.
While the participation reports are quite comprehensive and includes demographic information on computer science and computer engineering students.
The findings publicly available only date back to 2001 and intersection of information on undergraduates was not presented until 2013.
Where it is included in the 2012 to 2013 report, moreover, tell the focuses on institutions that offer PhDs and competing fields and they exclude for profit institutions.
This type of reporting limits the representation of certain institutions and, in particular, may result in the exclusion of minority serving schools like historically black colleges and universities.
Meanwhile, the National Science Foundation is an independent federal Agency in the United States.
That is responsible for funding a large percent of science, technology engineering and mathematics aka stem related initiatives and research.
They also collect analyze and present data pertaining to stem education in conjunction with the national Center for science and engineering statistics, or rather ncs.
And CSS utilizes data from the integrated post secondary education data system ipads survey and national census conducted with institutions that receive federal funding in.
The National Science Foundation published a report on graduation rates for degrees in computer science between 1966 and 2012 well they presented information on the gender of degree recipients, it was aggregated and thus lack the nuance of just aggregated data.
The Association for computing machinery is non doctoral granting departments in computing acm and DC also began presenting computing demographics in 2012 to 2013 as a compliment to tell me.
The acm and DC survey provides annual information about non doctoral granting four year institutions in computing fields including computer science computer engineering information systems, information technology and software engineering.
Well, this survey does offer information about the number of graduates by gender, race and ethnicity demographics are not reported by intersections group.
Now that we've established all the ways data has been collected in computing and that intersection ality isn't always considered we wanted to discuss the way that we approach the problem.
We use the multiple institution database for investigating engineering longitudinal development.
aka midfield together descriptive statistics that participation in computing fields and to provide a cross sectional look and enrollment graduation rates of women.
and especially black women Hispanic atlantic's women native American women and Asian Women.
We want to note that, for the rest of this presentation, the terms we use, for example, native American rather than indigenous people were selected based on the conventions and demographics collected in midfield.
Stephanie Lunn: midfield is a longitudinal database with student data from 19 different institutions and consists of records for over 1.5 million undergraduates.
Stephanie Lunn: These records include demographic information like gender ethnicity and race, as well as transcript data.
Stephanie Lunn: which allows users to track academic information throughout the duration of the students education, including academic major courses taken grades and graduation.
Stephanie Lunn: mayfield began data collection in 1987 and continues to do so, currently adding new participating institutions annually, due to the size of this data set Unlike some other data sources midfield has the potential of supporting analyses of dis aggregated data and to therefore provide.
Stephanie Lunn: emitted due to small numbers, the reporting universities and colleges were geographically dispersed throughout the United States and represented varying types of institutions.
Stephanie Lunn: Private public small, medium and large, including predominantly white institutions to historically black colleges and universities and one Hispanic serving institution.
Stephanie Lunn: The two hbc us stopped reporting after 2003 2004 which may explain one of the shifts and demographics, after this timeframe that we will later show you.
Stephanie Lunn: It should also be noted, there were no formal tribal colleges and universities or Asian American native American Pacific islander serving institutions a s a P, I ECE is in this data set.
First, we consider the intersection ality of race, ethnicity and gender for all students enrolled in computing fields, as shown in this figure, this was a measure of the enrollment where the total number of students was 42,865 between 1987 and.
As you can see here the dotted lines represent women and the solid lines represent then we then go into each intersection or group, as represented by the different colors.
immediately, we can see the stark contrast to the representation of women in computing consistent with prior work white men continued to represent the largest percentage of total enrollments across all yours considered.
Although women represent 50.8% of the general population in the United States and computing their enrollments are far lower.
Here we separate out women from different racial and ethnic groups so that you can see their enrollments a little bit more clearly.
White women in computing tend to have the highest enrollments relative to other racial and ethnic backgrounds, yet the only counted for 19.7% of the total computing population at its highest.
which was a 1987 and they continue to diminish their after the one notable exception to this is black women who had the highest enrollment of any racial and ethnic group in 1991 at 14.3% of the population.
This peak was a substantial increase from the initial enrollment rates of 6.6% in 1987.
Furthermore, after achieving higher Romans in 1991 black women continue to diminish and the total population, and by numbers were down 2.7% additionally Asian Hispanic and latinx and native American women consistently saw lower representation through out the data.
While midfield includes information between 1987 in 2018 We limited the graduation analysis to a subset of 1987 to 2012.
Because we wanted to allow six years to ensure any students who may have enrolled had the average time to graduate of six years the chosen dates are consistent with a six year window that is recommended by the national Center for educational statistics.
The graduation rate trends for all students and computing fields is illustrated here.
Again, the largest demographic with regards to graduation rates was white men, which range between 45.2% and 1989 and 71.8% in 2007.
The highest graduation rate seen for non white men was Asian men in 2004 which had a 10.6% graduation rate, however, it should be noted that these rates are proportionally higher than the percentage of Asians represented in the general population.
Overall, we observed lower levels of graduation for each group, then we did for enrollment suggesting an attrition problem.
In order to try to explain the stark peaks and valleys and the quantitative analysis we applied historical context analysis.
historical context analysis consists of a critical examination of documented past conditions to describe the political, cultural, economic and social climate that defined critical periods of change.
According to given context is defined as the external characteristics of the situation to be studied that are situated outside the individual group or even institution or community that are the focus of interest.
Given argues that this method is useful, since individual behavior is influenced by the historical events that define a particular place in time.
Considering the relevance of broader factors that evolve and influence populations, we use historical context analysis to describe enrollment and graduation rate fluctuations in computing.
Therefore, we also consider historical events in terms of institutional funding initiatives organizations or groups that could impact academic decisions.
Within the context of our research and our quantitative analysis.
We would like to note that we defined a notable shift as a change in the enrollment or graduation rates have a specific intersection group from relatively stable values over the span of several years.
To one which was comparatively higher or lower the following years the precise amount of fluctuation is determined by the proportional representation within the group of study as compared to the overall population.
relative to the men in the mid 50s dataset women tend to have lower enrollment and graduation rates overall.
This is consistent with other reports and research in computer science, the number of bachelor's degrees, I worked at two women increase from a few hundred in 1972 almost 14,000.
In the late 1980s, however, it has started to decline in 1990 and then a stagnated in the mid 19 and it overall we observe that women never rise about.
20% enrollments for any racial or ethnic group, moreover, even white women, which tend to have the highest rates for women overall are well below the percentages for white men.
Why at the highest representation in total enrollment in 1987 a time which also included some major developments to work, the inclusive beauty.
of women in computing in 1987 Dr Anita Burke and 12 other women in computer science started a Community connected via email called sisters.
To discuss problems at work technical issues and to share resources after recognizing that there was an unequal representation in.
computing the acm created a committee in the 1992 rodin participation one focus was to undo policies that gave unfair advantages, on the basis of race and gender.
Then in 1993 a new committee was established, called the Committee on the status of women in computing later renamed to acm Committee on Women in computing.
According to historical records they try to encourage activities like mentoring or promotion of the accomplishments of women to bolster the representation of women.
In 1994 the grace hopper celebration of women in computing co founded by Dr Anita Borg and Dr Taylor Whitney.
was created as a conference for women in technology from around the world.
prior studies have demonstrated that celebration of women's contributions to a community are important for fostering a sense of community.
Moreover, it was reported that not only did attendees report feeling inspired by the role models.
They saw at the conference, but more than half recorded they intended to continue to communicate with other participants as such events in addition the Anita Borg institute south to expand internationally, which it did with a 2010 grace hopper celebration in India.
Stephanie Lunn: The creation of grace hopper celebration was followed by the establishment of a not for profit, called the Institute for women and.
Stephanie Lunn: Technology on the Xerox Parc campus in 1997 by Dr on it on board with the intent to improve women's participation in computing and engineering fields.
Stephanie Lunn: Upon Dr books passing in 2003 Dr Taylor Whitney and the Board of Directors rename this group the Anita Borg Institute in addition to supporting sisters and grace hopper they also created several workshops.
Stephanie Lunn: To help women develop skills and leadership, such as developing and running effective organizations and institutions, in addition, they held a hackathons networking events offered a carrier services and created a forum for executives in technology.
In 1997 the nsf also developed the professional opportunities for women in research and education program with the intention of highlighting women in stem fields in 2001 this program was combined into advanced program established to support gender equity.
Additionally, the acm very short tapia celebration of diversity in computing was first launched in 2001 as a symposium it was established to encourage diverse networks that would allow students faculty and professionals, the chance to connect.
In 2004 the nsf also Charter, the national Center for women and information technology in order to improve participation of women in computing.
gives the loop, it was established by Sarah chips and minus all for staying in 2010 to offer events like meetups and hackathons as well as low cost courses and computing topics.
So they're more Pilate is was founded in 2011 as an international coating and support network for remain, with a focus on the Python programming language.
In an attempt to attract gears to computing from a younger age black girls code was established in 2011 black girls code is a group form that specifically for women of color by a Kimberly bryant that has mentored over 14,000 girls in the United States and South Africa.
Debra Davis: In addition, girls who code was founded in 2012 by rush masa Johnny and began as 20 girls in a single estate and has since expanded to roughly 10,000 years across 42 states both work to help a girl develop their.
Debra Davis: coding skills to classes programs and workshops and were created to encourage girls to pursue carriers in computing fits.
In 2012 the ship last last conference was established at Stanford university by I know.
Either ago and Laura is ronnie to encourage women to pursue computing carriers, not only did this event include attendance from several major technology companies but c++ went on to establish a fellowship and mentoring program for high school and college students.
Minority serving institutions have demonstrated the ability to foster a sense of community and belonging amongst diverse populations and have been lauded for their contribution to diversifying stem.
hbc us in particular have achieved the goal of improving academic outcomes for black and African American.
African American students at expressly us are less likely than a students at P data you is to report feelings of isolation racial discrimination.
or lack of social or academic integration furthermore hbc us have traditionally been a larger producer of African American sm bachelor degree recipients as of 2007 there were.
89 four year and 14 two year edge sales, in addition to this htc us there are approximately 50.
predominantly black universities which are defined as institutions in which a student enrollment is more than half.
African American in the midfield there are two htc use that report, which may impact some of their enrollment and graduations and numbers observed between 1987 and 2004.
Although efforts have been made to increase the participation of black and African Americans in stem fields numbers still remain, no.
Without the SPC us, as mentioned previously enrollment for black men and reaches its lowest levels in 2009 and is also only at 1% of the total computing population in 2012.
Several groups were created around this time to promote black and African American success which may lead to.
Long term enrollments and retention, although we are unable to predict based on, or a presence data.
Black women in computing was established in 2011 by Dr Danielle cummings along with the help of the Anita Borg Institute to encourage the participation of black women and other minorities in the field.
Then in 2013 and nsf grant was awarded to establish the Institute for African American mentoring in computing sciences.
Which is pronounced, as I am CS also created locally, it became a national resource designed to improve the participation of black and African American students in computing by creating programs and providing mentoring, training, research grants and peer mentoring.
2016 to further their mission, the national society for blacks and computing conference was created under the support of I a mcs.
The conference was dedicated to creating a safe space for participants to receive mentorship increase professional networks enhance their social capital and plan their carrier tragic stories these efforts have had a major impact on Black enrollment in computer science PhD programs.
The inaugural ve w ic conference like compute hair pronounced like computer was held at Harvard University for students faculty and professionals.
In 2017 the initial gathering serve and continues to serve to facilitate discussion surrounding gender and race, in technology fields and to provide resources and support for black women during their education and carriers.
Panic populations in the United States have grown rapidly over the past several decades, this group grew up by roughly 60% in the 1990s also we do not see an increase in computing enrollment until the late 2000.
Stephanie Lunn: In particular, we note enrollments of Hispanic women peak at 2% in 2002 however leading up to this time frame, there were several notable shifts in culture.
Stephanie Lunn: and historical events which may have led to this rise in the Hispanic population in stem fields, and especially in computing.
Stephanie Lunn: In 1986 the Hispanic association of colleges and universities was established by academic and business leaders to promote higher education for Hispanics then as part of the higher education act in.
Stephanie Lunn: 1992 ha see you wrote language included in the bill passed by Congress to create Hispanic serving institutions.
Stephanie Lunn: it's just eyes have demonstrated an important role in computing to improving both enrollment and graduation rates in sm fields at present it's.
Stephanie Lunn: reported that although address is represent less than 6%, of course, the country institutions in the United States approach approximately half of the Hispanic and Latino.
Stephanie Lunn: Students that attend college are enrolled in hs eyes are several times and individuals that were notable for Hispanic and Latino.
Stephanie Lunn: Women in stem as well, Dr Ellen ultra to develop optical and and computing hardware systems that very used by NASA.
Stephanie Lunn: In 1993 she was the first Latino astronaut to go into a space abroad, the space shuttle discovery and then she was the 11th director of the Johnson.
Stephanie Lunn: Space Center she was there Jay says first Hispanic director and the second female director.
Stephanie Lunn: receives the Hispanic technology and telecommunications Carter partnership was established to represent the Latino population in policies pertaining to the communication and technology.
Stephanie Lunn: tech Latino was also created in 1997 as a technology focused professional organization that offer seminars workshops research and policy analysis for professionals or students and businesses.
Stephanie Lunn: In 2016 computing aliens of Hispanic serving institution was founded on the nsf initiated to ameliorate the representation of Hispanic enrolled in universities and present in industry.
Also in 2006 a group of Latinos gathered at grace hopper celebration and formed Latinos in computing a group which is involved in different workshops conferences and professional groups to form a network of Hispanic.
Women and letting us Furthermore, in partnership with http the Latino tech Summit was established in 2016 to create a Community of Hispanics and letting individuals and companies that work in technology.
There were also several professional societies created to foster a sense of community for Hispanics in the 70s, which continue to grow over time, such as m as.
which works to promote cultivate and honor excellence in education and leadership among Latino engineers and scientists also as HP E the society of Hispanic professional engineers was was established they serve more than 11,000 members and drawn a 375 college and university chapters.
There are also several shifts of the four fated American women for perspective, we want to note that the demographics, of a native American college or.
University enrollees are often a bit different from other populations, more than a third are usually older older than 30 roughly two thirds are women and typically these are students are financially independent.
In 1994 Native Americans were also granted lanta statues by Congress, which designated tribal colleges and universities as a land grant institution which ensure.
ongoing funding presently there are 737 fully accredited TC us also less than one fifth of all Native Americans that are enrolled in college or enrolled in SEC.
In 2000 the nsf established the tribal colleges and universities program and TC up to support technology upgrades upgrades and the purchase of equipment and to promote outreach.
Next we consider Asian Women Asians are often reported as being present in stem fields at a higher proportion that's their representation in the general population.
associations are often neglected in computing research and funding initiatives, yes, when the when data is filtered is accurate is aggregated.
On the basis of intersection ality Asians women have for lower levels of representation in computing than Asian men in the computing workforce and should therefore be considered independent densely.
Key hank, who is a computer scientist who's worked on the national, Community and networking facility of China and CFC projects and talks with nsf are attributed to the launch of the Internet in China in 1994 a tcp IP connection was set up to connect China to the worldwide best.
Muslim who continue to develop an online presence in the country and co founded the Internet society of China is see in 2000.
In 2007 eight and API is is very established and another enrollment based minority serving institution.
And, in particular, this designation was awarded to schools where at least 10% of the population were Asian Americans or Pacific islanders and where half of the students were considered low income based on their participation in the federal pell grants.
By 2016 there was two on 281 eligible Asian American and native American Pacific islander serving institutions which is 8% of all US institutions of these 281 27 of.
The society of Asian scientists and engineers was also established in 2007 to support Asian professionals in science and engineering fields and to encourage support in local communities.
Additionally, the China computer federation is a professional computing group that has partnership with a theme and I triple E computer society.
Overall, the cultural shifts throughout history, have led to many attempts to broaden participation, including the establishment of organizations and groups to help build up communities for women in computing.
However, we must acknowledge at each student is unique and no single strategy can be employed to encourage the persistence of all underrepresented groups.
Nonetheless, it is important to consider the differences and instructional styles and training that can foster heightened interest in support.
Students that come from cultural backgrounds value and collectivism over individualism may find themselves, preferring peer coding or group projects to individual assignments.
Furthermore, supportive peer networks have been shown to be critical for recruiting African American and Latino students at high schools into computing classes.
more creative approaches and especially those that highlight culturally relevant pedagogy may serve to increase interest and to facilitate learning of topics students may otherwise find challenging.
Furthermore, we cannot deny the impact that government lead or funded initiatives have had on moving the needle.
The literal buy in from the National Science Foundation through funding mechanisms have established many of the programs already discussed and expanded access and support for black and brown people in computing.
Likewise, the invisible Labor of those from the least represented groups being women blacks Hispanics and Latin x's Native Americans or Asians and creating their own communities organizations and support structures.
is commendable and arguably invaluable to professional identity, development and the persistence and minority engineering and computer science students.
Despite the slow movement, there is still an opportunity to invest expand and grow the profession for the better through broadening participation.
Going forward, it is important for researchers to continue to examine what contributes to the enrollment and graduation rates of computing students.
Despite initiatives to remediate enrollment and persistence of underrepresented groups in computing women in computing have not seen substantial increases.
Furthermore, considering the intersection ality of gender and race or ethnicity, we observed that white women black women and men Hispanics flashlight X women in men.
native American women and men and Asian Women are particularly underrepresented, as such, it is important to further their unique pathways to computing.
And the factors influencing persistence of these populations, not as an aggregate but instead on their own terms.
Work that explores the intersection of experiences could aid and finding new ways to engage and maintain these groups in computing fields.
The analysis presented is intended to encourage educators and administrators to further investigate these sexual experiences.
so that they can provide more targeted support for students with equity in mind and to evaluate practices that may limit the participation of women and racial or ethnic minorities.
One potential option is to try to engage women re entering academia at non traditional time points research suggests that often women leave school for financial reasons or to take care of family.
recruiting women returning to education are looking to upscale or re skill could prove a great potential source of untapped talent, to reduce the under representation of women in computing.
Moreover, we recommend additional research and just switching behavior in terms of what encourages women from other majors to enroll and persist in computing.
understanding what motivates minority groups to succeed in computing despite academic challenges and a lack of same race and same gender peers and faculty.
is critical towards improving their retention and tenacity in the face of obstacles.
Our results also demonstrate the importance of including a wide range of universities when examining different populations in computing.
That a set should be established with reports from historically black colleges and universities Hispanic serving institutions tribal colleges and universities.
and Asian American and native American Pacific islander serving institutions to gain a clear picture of the landscape.
Furthermore, data collection and analysis should seek to offer intersections breakdowns to provide greater insight about the numbers of each group.
As well as their distinctive experiences only through enhanced understanding can we help to broaden participation and to make the field more equitable for all students.
LaVerne Gray: Thank you so much as a wonderful presentation, I believe we just have a couple minutes left.
LaVerne Gray: and
LaVerne Gray: One want to address the question that was asked before the session and and, at the beginning of this one i'm.
LaVerne Gray: Coming from amber and Terry plaids what can women do to help other women and especially those that are underrepresented minorities join the tech field and or educational institutes Thank you so much for the question.
Stephanie Lunn: So thank you so much for the question, thank you all for your patience, I know, that was a lot of information.
Stephanie Lunn: in regards to the answer for that there are a number of things that you can do.
Stephanie Lunn: supportive communities are invaluable it's been shown, especially to minority women who may otherwise feel like they're isolated.
Stephanie Lunn: And may not have social support so joining groups like mez B or shape have been instrumental it's been shown for students to help build that professional community.
Stephanie Lunn: to learn about what to expect from careers to find mentorship to help with hackathons and develop programming skills and ask questions seek mentors and ask friends and build your community and know that you're not alone.
LaVerne Gray: Yes, thank you, thank you alright, so we do have one minute left what i've done for everyone who's here in the session is posted the the Google Doc with the session information space for comments and link to the slides.
LaVerne Gray: And just want to remind stephanie to make the slides available because there was a block when I tried to get to it, so I tested it right before, and please leave your comments there, this was such rich information I have, like so many questions I said I can fill in a gap, so if they don't.
Have.
LaVerne Gray: This was fantastic work and thank you so much for bringing to light what is these trends that have been happening over the years and thinking about ways that we can combat this.
LaVerne Gray: recruitment and enrollments and retention in these areas, so I think we should all give our presenters have a big hand symbol are.
LaVerne Gray: In in.
LaVerne Gray: In zone, a hand clap and I just wonderful wonderful work Thank you so much, and Thank you everyone for coming.
Stephanie Lunn: Thank you everyone will be sure to answer your questions to end Hoover.
LaVerne Gray: know they wanted to have the Google Doc is the link to the survey dude is there a link to the survey Hannah.
Hannah Erickson: Which survey.
LaVerne Gray: Is by the conference, Sir up for each session there's a survey for each.
LaVerne Gray: In the it might be in the world hova.
Hannah Erickson: yeah it probably is.
OK.
LaVerne Gray: And there's a additional question in the chat from Jimmy see that can be placed in the comments in to get links to some of the Asian American associations.
Stephanie Lunn: Sure i'd be happy to share the ones that we found I do want to note that one of our biggest concerns that we came across is that surprisingly there wasn't a lot of Asian American associations.
Stephanie Lunn: And, in part, it was noted that this may be, because there are so many disparate groups there may be populations.
Stephanie Lunn: Where they may speak completely different languages, whether it's Vietnamese or Chinese, and so we were actually very surprised that we.
Stephanie Lunn: Not only tried to do extensive research on this, but that was one of the few populations and, in part, we suspect that that's because so often we hear that Asian Women are overrepresented.
Stephanie Lunn: But really it's Asians are overrepresented when you look at them as an aggregate, but when you separate out men and women as we showed here today.
Stephanie Lunn: Asian Women are often underrepresented, so one of the comments in our papers that we actually think it would be wonderful if we could see that kind of development of those programs.
Stephanie Lunn: That could help Asian Women to build up their community and that we can obviously put in the organizations that we did find but like I said they were fairly limited overall.
LaVerne Gray: Thank you, thank you so much.
LaVerne Gray: Because we have people here, I did have a quick question were you able to in your historical context Texas.